sourmash tax submodule
===
_(for integrating taxonomic information)_


## Background
The sourmash tax (alias `taxonomy`) commands integrate taxonomic information into the results of sourmash gather. tax commands require a properly formatted taxonomy csv file that corresponds to the database used for gather. For supported databases (e.g. GTDB), we provide these files, but they can also be generated for user-generated databases. For more information, see the [databases documentation](https://sourmash.readthedocs.io/en/latest/databases.html).

These commands rely upon the fact that gather results are non-overlapping: the fraction match for gather on each query will be between 0 (no database matches) and 1 (100% of query matched). We use this property to aggregate gather matches at the desired taxonomic rank. For example, if the gather results for a metagenome include results for 30 different strains of a given species, we can sum the fraction match to each strain to obtain the fraction match to this species.

As with all reference-based analysis, results can be affected by the completeness of the reference database. However, summarizing taxonomic results from gather minimizes the impact of reference database issues that can derail standard k-mer LCA approaches. See the [blog post]() for a full explanation, and the [`sourmash tax` documentation](https://sourmash.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command-line.html#sourmash-tax-prepare-prepare-and-or-combine-taxonomy-files) for additional usage details.

## Running this tutorial 

Run through these commands interactively on the binder, here:

> Alternatively, you can install the latest version of sourmash by following our 
> [installation instructions](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sourmash/blob/latest/README.md#installation)
> and run these commands on your own computer.

## Download example inputs for `sourmash tax`

In this example, we'll be using a small test dataset run against both the `GTDB-rs202` database
and our legacy `Genbank` database. (New genbank databases coming soon, please bear with us :).

#### download and look at the gtdb-rs202 lineage file

```
mkdir -p lineages
curl -L https://osf.io/p6z3w/download -o lineages/gtdb-rs202.taxonomy.csv
```

```
head lineages/gtdb-rs202.taxonomy.csv
```

This is the taxonomy file in `csv` format. 
The column headers for `GTDB` are the accession (`ident`), and the taxonomic ranks `superkingdom` --> `species`. 

Now let's go ahead and grab the `genbank` taxonomy files as well:

```
curl -L https://osf.io/cbhgd/download -o lineages/bacteria_genbank_lineages.csv
curl -L https://osf.io/urtfx/download -o lineages/protozoa_genbank_lineages.csv
```
> If you do a `head` on these files, you'll notice they have an extra `taxid` column, but otherwise follow the same format.


## Combining taxonomies with `sourmash tax prepare`

All sourmash tax commands must be given one or more taxonomy files as parameters to the --taxonomy argument. 

`sourmash tax prepare` is a utility function that can ingest and validate multiple CSV files or sqlite3 
databases, and output a CSV file or a sqlite3 database. It can be used to combine multiple taxonomies 
into a single file, as well as change formats between CSV and sqlite3.

> Note: `--taxonomy` files can be either CSV files or (as of sourmash 4.2.1) sqlite3 databases.
> sqlite3 databases are much faster for large taxonomies, while CSV files are easier to view 
> and modify using spreadsheet software.

Let's use `tax prepare` to combine the downloaded taxonomies and output into a sqlite3 database:

```
sourmash tax prepare --taxonomy lineages/bacteria_genbank_lineages.csv \
                                lineages/protozoa_genbank_lineages.csv \
                                lineages/gtdb-rs202.taxonomy.csv \
                                -o lineages/gtdb-rs202_genbank.taxonomy.db
```

> Note that the order here **is** important if the databases contain overlapping
accession identifiers. In this case, GTDB contains only a subset of all identifiers
in the NCBI taxonomy. Putting GTDB last here will allow the GTDB lineage information
to override the lineage information provided in the NCBI file, thus utilizing GTDB
taxonomy when available, and NCBI lienages for all other accessions.

We'll use this prepared database in each of the commands below.

## `sourmash tax metagenome`

#### Download a small demo `sourmash gather` output file from metagenome `HSMA33MX`

```
mkdir -p gather
curl -L https://osf.io/xb8jg/download -o gather/HSMA33MX_gather_x_gtdbrs202_genbank_k31.csv
```
> This `gather` was run at a DNA ksize of 31 against both GTDB and our legacy Genbank database.

Here's an abbreviated version of this gather CSV:
```
f_match,f_unique_to_query,name,query_name
0.084,0.088,"GCF_001881345.1 Escherichia coli strain=SF-596, ASM188134v1",HSMA33MX
0.104,0.077,"GCF_009494285.1 Prevotella copri strain=iAK1218, ASM949428v1",HSMA33MX
0.007,0.041,"GCA_002754635.1 Plasmodium vivax strain=CMB-1, CMB-1_v2",HSMA33MX
```

You can look at the whole file like so:
```
head gather/HSMA33MX_gather_x_gtdbrs202_genbank_k31.csv
```


Now, let's summarize this metagenome and produce `krona` output at the `species` level:

```
sourmash tax metagenome --gather-csv gather/HSMA33MX_gather_x_gtdbrs202_k31.csv \
                        --taxonomy  lineages/gtdb-rs202_genbank.taxonomy.db \
                        --output-format csv_summary krona --rank species
                        --output-base HSMA33MX.gather-tax.
```
This will produce both `csv_summary` and `krona` output files, with the basename `HSMA33MX.gather-tax.`.


We can also download a second metagenome `gather` csv and use `metagenome` to generate a 
`lineage_summary` output to compare these samples.

```
curl -L https://osf.io/nqtgs/download -o gather/PSM7J4EF_gather_x_gtdbrs202_genbank_k31.csv
```

example `lineage_summary` output:

```
lineage HSMA33MX   PSM7J4EF
Eukaryota;Apicomplexa;Aconoidasida;Haemosporida;Plasmodiidae;Plasmodium;Plasmodium vivax	0.041084962106102914	0.004553734061930784
Eukaryota;Apicomplexa;Conoidasida;Eucoccidiorida;Sarcocystidae;Toxoplasma;Toxoplasma gondii	0.010370961308336658	0.0011275912915257177
d__Bacteria;p__Bacteroidota;c__Bacteroidia;o__Bacteroidales;f__Bacteroidaceae;g__Bacteroides;s__Bacteroides fragilis	0	0.05134877266024807
d__Bacteria;p__Bacteroidota;c__Bacteroidia;o__Bacteroidales;f__Bacteroidaceae;g__Bacteroides;s__Bacteroides ovatus	0	0.056726515742909184
```

> The lineage summary format is most useful when comparing across metagenome queries.
> Each row is a lineage at the desired reporting rank. The columns are each query used for
> gather, with the fraction match reported for each lineage. This format is commonly used
> as input for many external multi-sample visualization tools.

## `sourmash tax genome`

To illustrate the utility of genome, let’s consider a signature consisting of two different 
Shewanella strains, Shewanella baltica OS185 strain=OS185 and Shewanella baltica OS223 strain=OS223.
For simplicity, we gave this query the name “Sb47+63”.

When we gather this signature against the gtdb-rs202 representatives database, we see 66% matches to one strain, and 33% to the other:

abbreviated `gather_csv`:

```
f_match,f_unique_to_query,name,query_name
0.664,0.664,"GCF_000021665.1 Shewanella baltica OS223 strain=OS223, ASM2166v1",Sb47+63
0.656,0.335,"GCF_000017325.1 Shewanella baltica OS185 strain=OS185, ASM1732v1",Sb47+63
```
> Here, f_match shows that independently, both strains match ~65% percent of this mixed query.
> The f_unique_to_query column has the results of gather-style decomposition. As the OS223 strain
> had a slightly higher f_match (66%), it was the first match. The remaining 33% of the query
> matched to strain OS185.

#### Let's download the full `gather` file:

```
curl -L https://osf.io/pgsc2/download -o gather/Sb47+63_x_gtdb-rs202.gather.csv
```

We can use tax genome on this gather csv to classify our “Sb47+63” mixed-strain query:

```
sourmash tax genome --gather-csv gather/Sb47+63_x_gtdb-rs202.gather.csv \
                    --taxonomy lineages/gtdb-rs202_genbank.taxonomy.db \
                    --output-base Sb47+63.gather-tax. 
```
> This command uses the default classification strategy, which uses a containment threshold of 0.1 (10%).
> Note that even though this gather was only run against `gtdb-rs202`, there's no issue with using the
> full taxonomy database we prepared above, as it contains all of the `gtdb-rs202` information.

The default output format is `csv_summary`.

This outputs a csv with taxonomic classification for each query genome. This output currently consists of six columns:
`query_name`,`rank`,`fraction`,`lineage`,`query_md5`,`query_filename`, where `fraction` is the fraction of the query matched to
the reported rank and lineage. The `status` column provides additional information on the classification:

- `match` - this query was classified
- `nomatch` - this query could not be classified
- `below_threshold` - this query was classified at the specified rank,
but the query fraction matched was below the containment threshold

```
query_name,status,rank,fraction,lineage
"Sb47+63",match,species,1.000,d__Bacteria;p__Proteobacteria;c__Gammaproteobacteria;o__Enterobacterales;f__Shewanellaceae;g__Shewanella;s__Shewanella baltica
```

> Here, we see that the match percentages to both strains have been aggregated, and we have 100% species-level
> Shewanella baltica annotation. We have omitted the query_md5 and query_filename columns for brevity.

## `sourmash tax annotate`

`sourmash tax annotate` adds a column with taxonomic lineage information for each database match to gather output. 
It does not do any LCA summarization or classification. The results from `annotate` are not required for any other
`tax` command, but may be useful if you're doing your own exploration of `gather` results.

```
sourmash tax annotate --gather-csv gather/Sb47+63_gather_x_gtdbrs202_k31.csv \
                       --taxonomy lineages/gtdb-rs202_genbank.taxonomy.db
```


